Right.
Greetings, fellow MPs.
So a few short remarks.
The recent SOPS, that's the Situation
Outlook from the Primary Sector,
shows that there's been a diminution in the returns of our sector
that's related
to a slight reduction in the extraction rate
and reduction in key commodity prices and a
reduction in aquaculture output.
But you can read about that in your leisure.
As you'd know, I have written a letter
to the chair, I don't know if you've received it, suggesting that
the select committee, after having heard from one of three of you
on this committee, that perhaps my much beloved
bill
could do with
some more panel beating if I was genuinely interested in
consensus.
So,
that's with you,
which is an element of importance to me, but
it's clear to me there's a tremendous amount of whitewater,
Madam Chair, around the Fisheries Bill.
So,
you may or may not choose to communicate with the business committee about an
extension of a report back. That's obviously of
importance to a number of the people wanting to
contribute to the future of the bill, some of you sitting around this
table.
In relation to some of the more
notable matters,
got court cases against us with the Eli Group,
Te Ohu Kaa Moana, outstanding litigation pertaining to what are
known as 28M rights. That's a historical matter
traceable back to the original Sealord deal.
Working through the extension of further measures to look after the hoiho
penguin down off the coast of Te Waipounamu.
Obviously, there's various reporting matters, which I'll address during the
question time.
And there's the ongoing challenges as to
where's the
line between those who
want to curb fishing activity pertaining to
trawling
And my preference
that we do not interfere with the productivity of the
industry.
Yeah, I think you've spoken to me on various occasions in
the House. You've heard my
various narratives in public spaces, and I'll
just stop there and answer any questions you might have.
Thank you, Minister. We've got a great question from Rachel.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you, Minister.
I'm just going to ask some questions, I guess, around the bill and decision
making for you to come to the committee and ask for that
extension. Is that as a result of disagreement within the
coalition parties as to whether the bill should proceed or whether it requires
significant change?
Well, it's evident to me, despite my
desire to charge on ahead,
that there is a lot of disharmony. That was evident when you and I were on the
panel together at the commercial sector,
that
amongst
some of my own people as well on the Māori side.
Obviously, across the House, there's not a lot of harmony
about the bill.
So if I'm going to take responsibility for it, I am the author of the bill,
and if it can be improved by some more panel beating,
then
I'm up for that.
What specific issues from Māori side has been raised?
From the te reo Māori.
I've learnt that my generation are probably a lot more
pro-commercial. There's a new generation coming through in iwi leadership,
and they're not so hard-nosed as the matua,
and they do want to see a more pragmatic approach
in relation to greater focus
based on what they regard as sustainability measures
and
more reliance on
long line catching.
Some of them do want
these
corridors for trawling.
Mm.
Not all, but I have to confess, some do.
I'm opposed to that, but I would be lying if I didn't say that
engagement with some iwi, they feel that
that's the way of the future.
Have you had-
Through the Chair, Rachel
...
I can actually stay questioning, and we've got an hour 30 minutes.
So,
have you had instruction, I guess, either from your leader or from the Prime
Minister that this was becoming a challenging place for you?
I take no instructions from anyone other than the leader of my party.
Okay. So have you had instruction from the leader of your party to-
No. None whatsoever. I'm very well aware that
there was a host of opinions tossed about
several months ago,
indeed some from yourself,
from some of the backbenchers that they were upset that I'd
taken too much of a hard line
against opponents of the bill. So I accept
that
those individuals were concerned, but I don't take
instructions
in the way that you've described. It's only from my leader, Winston Peters.
So I've just got about two more on this.
Do you accept that the sector's quite polarized, right?
And that's my observation in terms of how people often
talk to each other. But actually,
most people want the same thing, right, which is a sustainable fishery and a
healthy ocean and an ability for people to fish both commercially and
recreationally. Do you accept that there actually needs to
be,
from all parliamentarians, but yourself particularly as minister, an approach that
engages with everyone who has an interest and actually listens or sits down and
listens to all of the interests and to try to find that common ground?
Yeah, look, I think,
if we can take more time and improve the bill,
it's probably better for the sector.
I also think that your point's well made,
that it's highly contested space, and maybe the whole
election process will enable each party to go and campaign on what they think
is important about fisheries. And
if that's what they want to do, ka pai.
So just my final-
And whoever's left standing after the next election, let's wait and see where
the chips fall.
Yeah. So just my final question just on this.
Will you be willing to actually sit down and meet with the likes of Legacy, meet
with some of the recreational fishing community who
I know are keen to sit down and meet with you?
Will you actually be willing to sit down and meet with them to help try, as you
say, panel beat this bill into a shape where they could support it?
Yeah, so the last time that the recreational people
wanted to meet with me, I couldn't make it, but they were grossly discourteous and
disrespectful to Jenny Marcroft.
And I would not be willing to meet with people if that was the level of their
disrespect. I will gladly meet with them.
But my message to the men from that industry, if that's the way they treated
her, you'll get a different response if you talk to me like that.
Steve.
Is this a supp or a new line?
It's a supp.
Yeah.
Yeah, and to your point, Minister, the effect of a delay until
March next year is that it does make it something of an election
issue, doesn't it? And you will be taking your, as
you put it, harder line on the commercial
values that you advocate for over the
more protective ecological values that other people might wish to
represent, such as rec fishers, such as environmental organizations,
such as a number of iwi.
Well, whatever I say in the upcoming election, it'll depend on what the
manifesto that's agreed to by our party.
But I'm here today as the minister- And as the promoter of the
bill, I've written a letter, God only knows where it is,
saying that the business committee should contemplate via you
guys, an extension of the report back and
take some time to pluck the fruits of democracy.
Okay.
But, and I can't say much more than that.
I think we can let the minister know that we've supported the call for an
extension, can't we? No?
So anyway, uh-
I think that's-
Select committee processes are confidential, actually.
Yeah. Cameron, you first up.
Thank you. Chair, Minister, just a quick query on,
following on from Boyack's question.
Yep.
Not wanting to make a legacy and giving your reasons.
How do you engage with the recreational sector, as
it were? Who is it that you would meet with to get the views
writ large?
Well, I am a recreational fisherman.
Well, so you can meet with yourself.
I talk with myself.
I mean, yeah, I'm a recreational fisherman. Should we have a chat?
I think you misrepresent recreational fisheries.
Oh, Cameron-
You belong to a property rights party, but you seem to have declared war on
property rights.
I would say that is a most discourteous
mischaracterization of my position, Minister.
But just seriously to the question, other than yourself and perhaps me,
who would you speak to in the recreational sector?
Well, I-
Who have you engaged with?
I
have had a very successful meeting in Paihia recently
with the Sports Fishing Council,
and I have had the officials develop a
pact
between
the Crown and the Sports Fishing Council for the
future treatment of the sports fishery resource.
And, I think I'm the first politician who's ever done that, traceable
back to Colin Moyle.
I
think that
some of the recreational fishing groups,
they've long since abandoned science and they do most
of their work via Instagram,
so that's why I'll meet them at the ballot box.
Chair.
Good answer.
Primary.
Thank you. Oh, another primary, Alfred.
I've got a new primary as well.
Oh.
So-
Okay. Steve, we'll go with you first, and then-
And then Rachel
... and then we've got Greg.
The intertidal zone, Minister.
Yeah.
Out in West Auckland,
my neck of the woods, we have a major problem with
destruction of the intertidal zone.
Inappropriate harvesting of it, very high bag limits,
and no action as yet to protect that intertidal zone,
and no ability for local
community to effectively police it,
and a lack of resources
in terms of ministry policing of it.
These isolated areas that have got high ecological value
are at risk of further harm and destruction.
So what is going on with
your-
Yeah. So obviously-
... communications around protecting it?
I mean, there's a consultation document out there at the moment.
And who knows whether we've got enough time prior to the
cessation of Parliament.
I mean, they're collectively known as the buckets people.
I'll sort of split on the issue, eh.
I resent
the closure of those areas. I feel it
kind of kills off part of my birthright
because a small group of new migrants seem to have taken it upon
themselves to vacuum every sea anemone, every
starfish.
Now, that type of activity,
obviously,
we don't want to see it,
but
if we block every Kiwi from doing what
I grew up doing,
to me, it's quite a sad day.
But having said that-
Can I supplement?
... the consultation process will provide the option for the
Crown
to introduce blanket prohibitions,
for example, from the Waikato River up to the Whai Para Harbour.
And I guess all I'd say to us as fellow New Zealanders, be careful what
you wish for.
Can I just supplement?
And then we'll go to Cameron.
Can I invite, you may have already been, but I've recently taken a trip out to
Piha, West Coast, Hangamakau. The
very notable thing is for people who've been long-term residents there,
just how much
their intertidal zone has declined in terms of the health of the ecology.
I absolutely agree.
And there's new areas that are going to be opening up because of the movement of
sand, where people will be able to walk around areas that haven't yet been
destroyed.
Yeah.
And so it's sort of critical. We're at a point where,
the problem gets a lot worse, and then everybody loses, unless
there's some sort of intervention-
Yeah
... to protect it.
Well, look, the options are there. The officials are bringing back the advice.
Jenny Marcroft has spearheaded this.
And then very soon, ministers will have the option, and I know there's a lot
of support across Parliament for prohibiting
the extraction of the vast majority of sea life from the
intertidal zone. And it could be that
in terms of our Kiwi culture,
as we absorb new
migrant populations, that's where we're at.
So all I guess I'm saying is across the house, as a
reflection of the broader New Zealand public, we all have to
Embrace that outcome. You have to ensure that it doesn't
turn into deep prejudice,
and at the same time,
we don't make such
hard changes without realizing we're also changing some of the
things that my generation took for granted, what it meant to be a Kiwi.
That's my message, I guess.
We'll get back there, I hope.
Okay. We've got to-
Yeah
... swap from Cameron-
Yes
... and then we'll go to Greg cleaning with me
I think we all agree with that, Hope.
Just on that, but just one question that's come across to me a few times
is, even with people who completely agree with the rock pool
harvesting ban, the question of why is squid included?
I just hope you could answer that quickly.
Squid?
Why is squid included in that 200-meter limit ban for
invertebrates? It's...
Oh, okay. Well, we'll look at that-
Okay
... idea.
Oh, thank you, Minister. Back to you then.
Yeah. Okay.
I just-
We-
... have no idea. We'll look at it, mate.
Just go.
So someone write that down.
The undersecretary says it's being looked at, which is fantastic news.
Yeah.
Greg.
Tonight, Minister.
Just in the context of your focus on the
commercial benefits of fisheries and then
just reflecting on the conversation of the balance in terms of sustainability, can
you speak for a little bit about your plans around imports, around
aquaculture, marine farming?
Yeah. So
look,
I find the recreational leadership community
to be
a very
ill-informed group.
They resent any regulation of their activities.
They resent being required to report their catches.
We have absolutely no
granular knowledge as to how much the recreational catch
is.
Yet, I can tell you
to the nth degree
what the Sanford's catch is of their quota, because they have to
report every single kilo.
But I cannot tell you what the recreational take is of Whakatane,
Tauranga
or Hauraki. We do a model every three or four years.
So this medieval crusade that the
activists lead against the commercial sector is
based on the granular detail that they have about that sector,
yet they refuse to abide by a
system that would granularize the nature of their
catch.
But their day is coming.
Secondly, if we are to reduce the wild catch of a
commercial nature,
then where is the protein going to come from?
See, I don't believe all these fairy stories that
thousands and hundreds of thousands of working-class people are going out
and they're being denied a feed. The most people that can afford
an 80,000, 100,000 boat, they're not working class.
Gone are the days when I grew up, you had a little clinker and you've got a lot of
fish. Those days are gone.
So most people are buying their fish at a fish shop
or at a supermarket.
So not going to come from the commercial sector, then we're going to have to farm
it or we're going to have to import it as other nations do.
And I will tell you where it'll come from.
It'll be Basa or tilapia from Vietnam.
From an environment that is vastly inferior to
New Zealand's environment. I know that because I traded many, many years
ago.
So then if we are going to grow fish in our own country, then we need a regulatory
framework that facilitates it.
Mm-hmm.
And at the moment, we don't have that.
And this is what
I think is the trade-off.
If we want less wild fish caught for commercial
purposes, and we want to hand it over
to a range of people that are pretty entitled,
then we're going to have to pay out the Māoris who own the property
rights through a full and final settlement.
Then we're going to have to have a regulatory framework that makes it easier
to grow the protein that we won't have from the commercial sector.
So that's why if our party gets back, we will be
pushing for a brand new Marine Farming Act-
Mm-hmm
... that is dedicated to accelerating fish farming in New
Zealand. Because I can see the way in which society is going.
They want to shrink the footprint of fishing in general.
Now, these recreationalists think at the moment that they're joined at the hip of
the Greenies. They are sadly mistaken.
It won't be long before they too will go their own ways.
Because one thing I respect about the Greenies, they don't want anyone taking any
fish.
That's right.
At the moment, they're joined at the hip to save Hauraki Gulf.
But these recreationalists, like this bloke here, they'll soon learn
that these fellow travelers, the Greenies, have got the jump on them, believe you
me.
You go to Seth.
Yeah, just so around the Motu, where do you see some of this
new marine farming-
Predominantly the South Island, Greg,
because there's less nimbyism in the South Island.
And the opportunities down there,
you can do fish farming at scale.
There's lots of opportunity for salmon,
but it's extremely expensive. And peoples when they
spend all this dough,
they've got to know that their rights are intact.
Mm.
Yeah. Obviously, down where Rachel is, expansion of
mussel farming, but they've got to know that their rights are intact I
think one of the worst things that we ever did was force
the salmon farmers to spend $13.5 million trying
to get their rights to grow in and around Marlborough,
and they were defeated because of amenity values in the RMA, and
that's one good thing the Act Party is doing, stripping that out of the
RMA.
Yeah.
I've got some subs on this.
Yes.
I've just got some subs.
And then we'll go to Steve.
Yeah, I've just got some subs in relation to aquaculture and actually specifically
the RMA.
In terms of RM reform, I met with Aquaculture New Zealand a couple of weeks ago,
and they are a little bit concerned, and I'm interested if you've got
comment on, I guess, where they fit in that RM reform,
because they essentially have a land-based impact
on their
operations, and so they sometimes...
What they said to me was they feel like they're a little bit of no man's land.
And so I was planning on asking you today, how do you see them
fitting into that RM reform so that their activities can be encouraged and
grow?
Well, I think that the upcoming RMA reforms led by
Mr. Bishop and Simon, or I think they've got a lot
going for themselves.
But they do have a strong focus, in my view,
on
land-based things.
Yeah.
It's devilishly hard. I want to remind everyone when Simon Upton
passed the RMA after the Geoffrey Palmer
government, or no, it was the Mike Moore at the end
it was based around the belief there'd be lots of national policy
statements.
It took about nine years before the first national policy
statement came to be. There was a half-baked coastal policy statement in the
mid-'90s.
That coastal policy statement
hobbled coastal based industry, including
aquaculture, to this day.
So that's one thing we'll have to watch for the new regime.
But I think if you get the right national direction, excuse me,
for aquaculture.
But
I got to tell you, folks, it's trade-offs.
If we want protein-
Yeah
... we're not going, if we're going to shrink the footprint
of commercial fishing in New Zealand, which obviously a number of
you want to do,
then we're going to have to grow protein.
Okay. No, we've got a few subs. So I've got Steve, Denner, and then-
It's only aquaculture, that's all.
Yeah, these are all the subs. So Steve, then Denner, then you, Rachel. Thanks.
Maybe Rachel won't want to come.
Oh, okay.
Excuse me, what time does this session finish?
1:30.
Pardon?
1:30. Okay. No, just so, yeah.
Yeah.
No, it was specifically on aquaculture, and you just referred to those comments
again about growing the types of,
I guess, fish species that are being farmed.
And so I'm quite interested in that because salmon, for example, big export market.
Yeah.
A particular taste profile. It's not something you're going to use for your
Friday night fish and chips in New Zealand.
So, are you
actually looking at other species that could be
translated into a farming practice?
Yeah. So I'd want to invite the officials, but I know over the
years they've looked at it, but they've kind of given up.
Yeah. Well, the yellowtail kingfish is the most obvious,
and it's done pretty successfully in Japan.
So there's quite a bit we can learn from how they do it.
Hapuka was played with a bit, but I think
was not that successful at the trials up in,
Rukaka there. So,
I think the kingfish provides the most obvious, but there are potentially other
fish that could be tried. And so there's quite a bit in science
investment required here for us to...
This journey is not just a, this all the planning and resource consenting
arrangements that have been talked about.
There's quite a big investment with the science community, and they're sort of
coming together with us to try and make sure we coordinate our resources so we can
figure out how to do this well.
And then there's the sort of core infrastructure.
Because if you're talking about, what, 10 Ks out, potentially?
Yeah.
Anywhere between sort of
Karori, Littleton, sort of
that area,
south to Stewart Island.
If you go up the
Marlborough Sounds coming into the Cook Strait-
Mm-hmm
... there are three cages there. They've got trevally.
Problem with blue cod, it takes too long to grow.
Problem why hapuka failed with the ratio of food and
growth, too hard.
Yeah.
The thing about kingfish, as you well know, it
rapidly grows. So you can make that one work.
The Japanese have perfected snapper.
It's a type of bream, but there's that much snapper around.
Yeah.
This is the lie of these recreational guys.
They can walk on it. If anything, we're under pressure to increase the snapper
quota so much.
But
kingfish is the best one.
Okay.
That's Steven.
Thank you. There's been some investment already in
octopus farming, a million dollars, I think.
Auckland University has done some stuff on it.
Research.
Research into that. There's
some legitimate concern about the quite extraordinary
nature of octopus and their particular vocal and their
extraordinary intelligence.
Mm-hmm.
Is that something that you're interested in, octopus
farming, or do you think it should be rightly left to thrive in the
replenishing intertidal zone
and naturally harvested only-
I'll get the-
... not industrially farmed.
Steve will get the minister.
Yeah. I was just going to say. So MPI is not currently doing any
work on octopus farming. It's not something that's factored into our forecasts
in terms of aquaculture growth or opportunities
We're heavily focused on the existing industries of salmon and mussels and growing
them and-
Yes
... that's what's just being talked about, those other species.
But no, we've got no projects on the way off the spur.
And I understand the issues that you're raising.
And no plans at all.
No, we've got no plans.
Okay. Thank you.
Okay. Dana.
Thank you. Thank you, Minister. Welcome.
My question is around
what work is the government doing or MPI doing under your watch,
to support the continuation of iwi and Maori participation in
particularly, around some of those Bay of Plenty areas,
as you know-
Yeah
... with the
ongoing treaty obligations to-
Well-
And the opportunity for sector growth as a result.
Yeah.
Okay, so around about
2002, there was a Klondike run on
aquaculture space.
Then Peter Hodgson,
one of the ministers in Helen Clark's time, a vet, which made him
incomprehensible as a politician.
He then introduced a moratorium which prevented any
more aquaculture space being developed because people were
staking out all these claims and then hoping to profit by
selling them on.
At the time,
the government entered into an aquaculture settlement to try and take the
sting out of the Takutai Moana Treaty of
Waitangi settlement,
and then Helen Clark came up with a Treaty of Waitangi settlement
for
aquaculture. And it was based on the notion that iwi would
be entitled to a percentage of the consented
aquaculture space or a cash equivalent.
It's never really worked out because then iwi still had to go through the jungle
gym of getting the space consented.
Mm.
Then they looked at the
difficulty and the cost of doing that, so they gave up.
Mm.
Then Whakatohea had a punt,
and then,
as you know, quite controversial.
The PGF came along and we underwrote,
with private investors, the Craigs group, which are well known around-
Mm-hmm
... Eastern Bay of Plenty development,
and then built that harbor at Tolaga, which was a
public good investment.
Yep.
Now that's
now recently been recapitalized by private capital.
So that's positive.
It is growing.
Much to my surprise, quite a lot of mussel production now is
going into pet food.
Oh, I'm not going to...
Yeah. Which my father would be turning in his grave.
Yeah.
So this has actually meant
that as the place expands, although the
product sells itself, a lot of it is going now into
nutraceuticals. So that's positive.
I do get a bit hauhā that
iwi leadership, they talk a big game, but they've got to be committed.
It's a long-term business.
Mm.
And
I think that there's more that can be done, but once again, we need to
simplify the process, because unless you're pretty deep-pocketed, boy,
it's a very expensive process to go through.
And once again, the RMA process, I think it's designed to
reduce the transaction cost to get your farm up and running.
Mm-hmm.
For existing farms, as you know, the government extended all the permits for 20
or 25 years.
Mm-hmm.
So that's given a fillip of confidence to existing green farms.
Grant.
Yeah. It's a great conversation on the mussel farming and
the resource that's there, because there's sort of three
parts to it, right? There's the spat collection, the growing it, and then the
marketing it for a high-value protein.
Seems to be a lot of resource that's going into the farming and you've described,
Minister, the complications in trying to get approvals and permits for that
purpose. What are you working on? What's
being worked on to improve the continuity of
supply of spat and making sure that they get the seeding ability and,
as you've described, the horrendous
using mussels for such things as pet foods.
What are you doing to increase the perception that mussels are
a high-value, premium product that we could get more out of to double
our export earnings perhaps? Yeah.
All types.
Okay. Well, two simple things.
Most of the spat comes off the 90 Mile Beach.
It's been like that for as long as I can remember.
There's a fast track application going through down your neck of the woods,
Clearwater. They are going to take mussel spat,
on grow it to a certain size where it can escape the predation from the
snapper.
Further evidence that there's too much snapper in the water.
Then that will increase the capacity of the survivability of
the mussels. There are some, I won't talk about it too much because it's my
own tribe. They are doing some nurseries up in Tai
Tokerau. The Crown in John Key's time
did invest in the
hatchery down outside of Nelson.
That's been, I wouldn't say a hit-and-miss affair, but it hasn't
really cracked a nut. They were hoping to create
a golden shell mussel, and they've been working on that for about 20
years. So,
MPI put money into it.
It hasn't been a failure, but it has not really moved the dial.
So the science is still, expenditure's still going, but
it's the industry that are investing in nurseries to try and
hedge against the 90 Mile Beach, and it's up to the industry to
open up new markets, and that's what they're doing.
And hope the perception change. You want to comment on
that?
Yeah, I think
it has, eh, that
there's a genuine respect and an ongoing
appetite for New Zealand protein.
Mm.
Yeah.
We'll just wait for that.
Okay, cool. Yeah, perfect. Come and get you.
See you.
Okay, so
over to...
Okay, yes. It was just, I was going to be completely shameless and say, if I bring
you some king salmon pet food next week, can you pass it on to your leader and see
if he'll convince you that it's a very good protein for dogs?
Are you asking my leader to eat pet food?
To eat it? No.
To give it to his dogs.
Oh, okay.
And then convince you
that maybe it's actually a premium product and worth investing in.
Okay.
People spend a lot of money on pets.
Yeah.
Right. Jo, we've got a new line of questioning.
Yeah. Just a new question. Thank you.
Minister, you may be aware that Caulerpa has made its way into the Whangarei
Harbour,
and I would like to know how much do you work with or
have conversations with Minister Hoggard in that biosecurity space around
that sort of invasive species. And whilst it's not necessarily fisheries, it
certainly does impact it, and
potentially aquaculture, because obviously we know it smothers shellfish
habitats and things like that. So how much are you working
together? Because in my view, I don't think there's anywhere near enough money put
into trying to deal with Caulerpa.
I know you think about bovis, the money that was spent on that, and I
know they're not necessarily comparable, but I would say just as
important, and is it just because we can't see it on land that we're not putting as
much into it as we could? So-
Okay, on Caulerpa,
I'll defer to the officials. But you would know that
recently an innovative new machine-
Yes
... has been trialed up home.
Yes.
But in terms of its spread to Whangarei and other areas, it's
really out of my wheelhouse, so I'll ask Ray to address that.
So I guess my question is, do you work with the Minister for Biosecurity in trying
to determine,
or impress how important it is that he obtain funding?
Well, at the margin we do, obviously.
But for fear of me being asked to find the money to fund it, I tend to
stand to the side.
Okay.
The Whangarei
fund's pretty small, so we just treat that-
Straight away
... that'll be treated, yeah, it's-
I can ask more questions of the Minister.
Yeah, no. That'll-
Yeah
...
there is a crossover with the teams because
there are often
fishing interests that are being disrupted as well-
Yes. That's right
... by the Caulerpa, particularly around Great Barrier.
Yeah.
Yeah. It's just been quite difficult, actually.
Yes. Yeah
For people that have had their livelihood-
Mm
... you know, all of their lives as particularly tray fishing.
Yes.
And so that's been problematic for them, yeah.
Yes. Okay. Thank you. Steve.
Thank you.
Minister, fisheries enforcement and monitoring,
I understand there's a cut of 4.5 million from 64 million
in '25, '26,
and 59 million.
The overall budget isn't huge in that space, but I
wonder
how will those cuts be achieved and
can you assure us that there won't be fewer resources for
fisheries management and it won't result in increased
illegal, unreported, or unregulated fishing activity?
Well, on the staff,
I will defer to the managers of the
staff. In relation to reporting and cameras,
I'll deal with that myself.
That four and a half million, the main thing going on in there is the camera
program transitioning from a rollout program to business as usual, so-
Right
...
there was money there to kind of get the thing finished and in a good state.
So there's no
kind of material substantive change to our resourcing in-
Yeah
... in monitoring and compliance.
Yeah, just to give you the assurance too.
Mm.
You're right, the fisheries compliance group's relatively small.
Small, yeah.
So yeah, I don't see any space in there to make that smaller.
No.
No. So we won't be taking anything out.
But you don't recommend making it bigger?
Well, you'd always like more, you could do a bit more.
Yeah.
But
actually, the cameras have given us a lot.
They've given us a lot in terms of
actually better reporting,
and I think better ability for us to demonstrate our next one.
Yeah, I think you need to give more credit to the cameras.
You're supportive of the cameras?
Pardon?
You're supportive?
Well,
I'll tell you how good the cameras are.
Well, I may as well share it with you here.
It's due to the cameras-
I see
... that the officials now know
that in one of the set nets, a fisherman caught an orca.
We wouldn't have known that had it not been for the camera.
Mm-hmm.
That fisherman followed the rules,
and it'll all be revealed in good time.
A rather unpleasant outcome.
And I thought the orcas were quite delicate.
That would
have
not provided the same level of information but for the
cameras.
So
the data is now
accessible by the state.
The relevant sea captain
on a vessel, not particularly big,
would've followed the rules, Steve.
Then the officials can study it,
then work out
how
and what can be done
To avoid such a thing
happening
on a regular basis, because it is a non-bycatch.
Mm-hmm.
And there's not a hell of a lot of them bobbing around the coast of New
Zealand. But that's an example of the industry
abiding by the installation of cameras on
vessels that are between 30 and 40 feet.
Mm-hmm.
Often launched off boats.
And
that's the way in which technology can boost the
confidence of the public
that the industry isn't over as bad
as all these banshees
that you occasionally hang out with suggest it is.
I take it from you saying it was a bad outcome, did the orca not survive?
Well, it's a wildlife industry. Now, it could be the orca was already dead.
You've got a situation where you're setting nets,
and I'm told it's a net for catching shark.
Mm-hmm.
So it could be that the orca was already dead and it got embroiled in a
net. Not entirely sure. Or it could be going along and nibbling, as
they often do,
nibbling the fish caught in the net.
But the point of the matter is, officialdom
understand now because of the cameras and the honesty of the
captain
in reporting it to the state.
And it's not a common occurrence,
but it gives you an indication that the system is working perfectly
well.
But not a happy outcome for the whale.
But these things happen.
Sup.
Yes. Sure.
Well, sadly, I've just been told there were two orcas on two different occasions.
Right. So this may have been going on for some time, we just didn't know about it
till cameras came up.
No, I think that it's a very rare occurrence.
And it wasn't in the same place.
One was not far from where Pikea
came ashore,
where Captain Cook studied the transit of Venus. Where's that?
Polythemy?
Whangara.
Yeah, Whangara. Yeah. Is that where Pikea is? But that's a different sort of whale.
What sort of whale was that?
A big one.
I don't know the exact type of whale.
If you look at it from the perspective of the sea captain, he's on a vessel about
30 or 40 feet.
And a killer whale's about 5 or 6 tons, so he'd have got a hell of a
shock
seeing a whale come up in a net.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah. I don't know what the footage is.
I'm not interested in it and I don't have access to it.
It's highly likely it was a Kodak moment.
Sad.
In terms of-
Is this another sup, Steve?
It's a sup, yeah. I don't know if it's-
Yeah.
Yeah, it's a sup.
Okay.
On the broader question of cameras-
Steve, you're speechless.
Rare occurrence.
What are the fish stocks that currently have the greatest sustainability
concerns that you have gleaned at all through the cameras on
boat activity?
Well, I think the background information shows you that
there's constant debates around orange roughy.
Once again, you haven't given adequate
acknowledgement
of the decision we've made
to effect certain closures
where the spawning
locations are for orange roughy down there in
Whakatohea.
That's obviously a contested one.
But these things come and go. Years ago, it was, remember, the hoki.
The hoki dropped right down below 100. Used to be 260.
It's how the quota system works. There's been pretty
vigorous court cases, as you know, of the tarakihi
for quite some time up off the coast of
Hawke's Bay and Tairāwhiti.
There's far too much snapper.
There has been
obviously a big problem
which has been recognized and the industry has
supported the closure for red crayfish,
for want of a better expression.
And the paua is still
prevailing up in Tai Tokerau and around Tāmaki
Makaurau. That's a couple of examples.
But I'd urge you not to
catastrophize the whole system just by looking at a fish
that has to go through a rebuilding phase.
It's nowhere as bad as it was prior to the QMS.
Mm-hmm.
That's right. Thank you. Rachel.
Thank you. Thanks. I've got a new primary.
You touched a little bit earlier on science, and I just want to get into the
science components of the bill, even though
you're wanting to delay
the bill.
In the budget this year, did you seek additional funding
to try to lift up the amount of science work that MPI can
do? Because I think we all agree science is king in order to make good
decisions. But the science spend has
been, you're sort of tracking at a pretty
flat rate. It hasn't had an increase for a very long time.
So I'm just interested in how you see the role of MPI in
supporting the growth of science to make good decisions.
Well,
I'll
turn to the officials, but my view as the fisheries
minister
is obviously the science budget lies in another part of government.
Then we levy the industry
I think it's about $90 to $100 million.
Then we levy the industry 40-odd million, rough figures,
and then a portion of that is public goods science and a
portion of it,
let's call it private benefit.
Mm.
Then
I'm always leery that the science
spend
has to be
related
to outcomes
that actually improve the ability of the state
to get better
results for the management of the fishery stock,
not every oceanic problem that society might want
us to fix up.
So I've got a few subs on this. So
one of the things that was in the bill was the ability to
increase the provisions for carry forward from one year to the next.
Yes.
So the PSC carry forward. And this was a discussion I think that's been
live as part of the bill, was the need for good science.
So, do you think that our, the level of science and the level
of information we've got actually supports the ability to have more
flexibility in that process?
Well, you know as well as I do that when you go through these quota
rounds,
we obviously have working groups, we have genuine,
professionally trained scientists engaging,
either
representing the perspectives of the industry.
Let me call them more
people from the state as well,
i.e. NIWA or whatever the hell they're called now.
And perhaps academics from the universities.
They don't all agree.
Mm.
So the models or the perspectives are contested
and
perhaps what Ray said is accurate.
There's always a case for fighting for more,
but we are dealing with limited resources.
I don't think we're running the system,
and I know you probably don't agree with me, but I don't think we're running a
system on shabby science. I do think we're running a system
that's contested science. I do, I accept that,
and the whole Fisheries Act has had its purpose, a contest
between utilization and, for want of a better expression, the
viability, the carrying capacity, the sustainability of the resource.
And I'm more of an apostle for ensuring
the utilization dimension is not
crowded out by catastrophization
associated with arguments that have nothing to do with
fisheries management.
But I've got some-- And I guess this, though, I think, is where things are
contested because, and Zervos's got some subs on it.
Because surely, if there is an impact on things like biodiversity,
on ocean health, that then has the potential
to impact on the fishery stock and the long-term sustainability
of it. So that's where some of the
argument seems to be getting lost at the moment, is the need
for, I guess, some conservative elements of the management so that
we can ensure we've actually got stocks to be caught for both rec and
commercial purposes for generations to come.
Yeah, but I find that to be a left-wing argument dressed up as an
anti-commercial perspective.
But surely the, it's in the commercial industry's interests, and I
say this as the MP for Nelson as well, where we have a significant commercial
component, am I-
Yeah, but then I-
Surely we want to make sure they are viable.
But then I ask myself, what does that actually mean?
If I look at the sp- Okay. Let's take the most hotly contested
species of fish that excite all of Cameron's
mates.
Snapper, kahawai, tarakihi,
blue cod,
maybe,
maybe
blue nose or hāpuku. Let's just take those, okay.
What exactly about the oceanic environment, beyond
good fisheries management, is remotely
connected with the sustainability of those five fish?
Well, for an example, it's actually-- And actually, one of the things I've been
discussing with the sector is that it's not necessarily the fault of the sector
that these things are happening, but for example, warming seas are impacting on
where some of the stock is breeding and where some of the stock is-
Right
... is, you know. And so it's not about saying, "Commercial sector
bad, you've caused this." It's saying, all of these things are
interrelated, and we need to consider them when we're making good decisions-
Right
... uh, in the interest of the stock surviving.
Because if the seas are warming because of climate change, because-- or if the
sea's being damaged from land use activity, you know, sedimentation, all of those
things, that has an impact on the stock.
Uh, so it's not about saying, "You're overfishing and it's causing the stock..."
And that is an argument that's presented, and at times that's correct, but it's all
the other things that impact on how the ocean behaves and
therefore how the stock then behaves.
Oh, yeah. Okay. Yeah, sure. Yeah. Yeah, like sedimentation of that.
Yeah. Well, I mean, that's probably what we're going to be debating in
the upcoming election, Hauraki Gulf and
all of this other kind of, um,
green fiction.
Sedimentation's not green fiction, you know. I mean, we've had it in Nelson, right?
It, it, it impacts on,
it impacts on-
Anyway, let's park our debates up for the election.
Do you have another question, Steve?
Sure. Um,
it sort of do- it does extend on the question of res- managing resource
sustainability.
Another relatively minor cut, 3.9 million from
30, from 83 down to 79.
Um,
and it's
management, managing the resource sustainably-
I'm just trying to clarify the response that you've given to my colleague, Rachel
Boyack. Because
I don't think you seriously
deny the fact that a healthy oceanic ecology and all the
factors that contribute to that,
most of which, or a
substantial part of which might be outside of fishing activity,
is going to have an effect on the overall health of the fishery.
And
the extent to which we have a good handle on that health
is vital to the viability of it.
So
it seems again, an instance where
there's insufficient funds, probably at the starting
point, and those funds are being whistled away
all the further.
Isn't this a place where any government should be putting more substantial
investment so that we have really good data and
optics on what's actually going on out there in the fishery?
Well,
committee members, I'm the first to agree there's always a
trade-off and a pakanga, a fight about how much
should be dedicated.
But
let's pick a harbor.
Let's pick a harbor
like Kaipara Harbor,
which is regarded as a big snapper
nursery,
and then ask ourselves, okay, what's happening in that nursery that's impacting
on the quality of the environment that may have a deleterious impact
on the ability of the snapper to lay their eggs,
reproduce, right?
And then
what can Dan Bolger and his fisheries management people do when
they manage a fishery stock?
Can they control the farmers? No.
Can they control the Dargaville District Council? No.
Can they control the Hikurangi Swamp?
No.
Can they control the Russell State Forest, where the headwaters are, that
flow down the Wairoa River,
which eventually goes into the northern Wairoa River?
No. So this is what I get frustrated about.
This is about fisheries management.
And I agree that there's a lot of connection,
but I guess I'm pleading with you, this is a narrow
issue. How well is this small team doing
via the quota management system, managing
on behalf of the state and society, the
sustainability of the stocks? So of course, I agree that there's all
these crossovers with siltation and resource
management.
But I resent that regional councils should have the ability
to creep into what they do. Their job is within the
science.
Are they taking too much fish? Is the fish too small?
And all the rest of it can be taken care of by someone else.
I've got a quick sup.
Are your tools for measuring the quantity of the fish and the
prevalence of the fish, have they improved and increased?
Is your data better or improving?
I think
commercial fishers have to report
every cent of every kilo of fish that they catch, and
we would
say that the rollout of cameras in the inshore vessels has
improved the accuracy of reporting.
Not massively probably for the fish themselves.
There was a bigger change in the protected species reporting, but we have got more
comprehensive reporting from commercial fishers on the fish they catch now.
But that's your ET, whatever that acronym is, that easy to catch thing.
Is that how you measure that or...?
No. So every
commercial fisher has a device with them-
Yeah
... where every day they tap in
what they've caught. And a whole lot of other, not just fish, but any protected
species and what the times were and how long the net was in and all that stuff.
And we think because that's verified, it's verified by observers on the big deep
water boats.
It's verified by cameras on the inshore boats.
We put a lot of reliance on that data, and we think it's pretty good.
Great. Thank you. Right. We've got a question from Joseph and then Rachel.
No. Thank you, Minister. I've got a
question related to sort of... Well, for context, the cray
fishery down in Fiordland and Stewart Island, et cetera.
Back in the '90s, this was near collapse really.
It was 0.67 kilograms per pot
lifted.
The industry brought in a system to manage that themselves,
and it's now the most abundant cray fishery on the planet.
Around 8.5 kilograms per pot.
The nearest one is Cray Seven. It's about 2 to 3 kilograms.
It's far ahead of it. So just wondering, are there any lessons that have been
learned from the way that they managed to lift this from near collapse to the
most abundant cray fishery on the planet?
Isolation.
Right.
I mean, the reality is,
if you've got a fishery on the outskirts of a third of New Zealand's population-
Mm-hmm
... but more and more people are buying boats,
and their leadership of that boating community resent being
regulated. Why are you surprised
that they are
resentful of having their catches regulated?
So I'm not surprised
that they are constantly lobbing the Act Party
and the National Party.
But go and tell them I've got news for them after the election.
Hi. Right. Rachel.
Got a primary.
Thank you.
I'm just keen to get down to estimates, actually.
And-
Obviously, there's been, across all public service organizations,
a reduction in the vote, and for this particular
vote, obviously it's a vote level, not all the way down to fisheries.
So I'm just wondering if you've got any information you can provide the
committee on where you expect to make cuts in terms of spend
and jobs in the next financial year.
Well, Rachel,
we did talk about this before I came here, and I don't want to
dodge, but I've run this portfolio in such a way,
I've kind of left the food and rations to the CEO.
Good luck, CEO.
Yeah, no.
The
process
we're in at the moment is,
while government has
indicated through the budget 2%, 5%, 5%
financial cuts budgets going forward across departments.
It's also set out a broad staffing target, so we'll be part of
that as well.
What we have to do is,
within the next two, three months, we'll be working back through with ministers,
and then ministers ultimately, the cabinet, around where those things
finally land. So there's no final position on what
NPI might need to do in terms of staffing at this point.
So we've got to come back with what those options are.
One thing, we've talked about it a bit here today, but
one thing I think we're all pretty clear about here,
I don't think this is going to change, is that those folks that are working
at the very front end of our businesses, the ones that patrol our
shores and that are on boats and are on farms or
at the border,
or in food businesses.
We're not going to be looking to put those people up
as options to reduce the staffing.
So where will you put up options in?
Well, NPI's got three and a half thousand people.
They don't all work at the front end of the business.
And we've got a $1.3 billion budget, so we've got quite a
bit of room to move.
So it'll take some careful thinking through,
and with
ministers and with government. And we do have the opportunity to continue to
automate a range of things across all of the business.
And so look, I think we're just in the very early stages.
So you said automate across the business.
Yeah.
Would you see automation in some of those frontline roles, though?
Well, we already are.
So,
cameras on boats is a massive automation, and it's actually changed the number of
people we have as observers
where we don't have to do that.
You can think to in other parts of the front line where we will introduce a
system at the border within the next 18 months.
That will mean that it'll be even quicker for you to get through that border
and allow us to locate more of our staff into the difficult areas where we need
to do more searching and so on. So look, I think the technology is going to keep
coming as it has done, and it's always going to change-
So you-
... numbers of people that need to do particular jobs.
Actually, customs is a really good example.
Almost all of us here will just walk through a smart gate.
Yeah. So I guess just on that,
if you're looking at more technology use, obviously we had the news this week
around immigration, even though it's a different department, but some of their
work that was going on around biometrics at the border.
Yeah.
And so I guess just, can we get an assurance if you are
doing technology projects in that area that
they are actually going to be fulfilled and...
Totally. Well,
we're delivering a range of, and have delivered a range of technology projects.
I've done a fair few in my time in public
service,
and they're always challenging, just as they are in the private sector.
There's nothing unique about the public sector.
Okay.
Just to be clear about that.
But
one good example we're delivering at the moment is the
trade certification
upgrade, which means that we can send out electronic trade certificates to the rest
of the world for all the products that we export.
It's a $35 million project, and it'll deliver, and it's already partially
delivered, and it will be delivered and finished on time and on budget.
So one final question, which is, okay, so if we're talking about not
making job cuts at the front line, but mostly in the back office part.
Yeah.
Surely if we're also moving into more automation,
we actually will need people to be working in IT, project management, and all of
that work-
Yeah
... to actually create that tech. So surely-
... we'll actually need more people in the back office to be doing that work,
because it just moves the jobs from one part of the business to the other.
Well, I think, Rachel, the bottom line is
we have said, and we are going to campaign on a reduction in
headcounts,
and we're going to go to the ballot box
with that platform. Now, how precisely
it will come together, it's not unreasonable for politicians
to turn to the professional leadership of the state sector
to deliver that.
Thank you.
There's no single
model,
whether it's what labor in the times of Prebble
or Douglas, that version.
But
I think at the level of statecraft, the government's been very, very
clear. That's what we're going to campaign on.
Thank you. Jo.
Thank you. Mine's a sup on Rachel's topic with regard to
the reduction in back
office or back room staff, as you've referred to them.
Surely they support those on the front line to enable those on the
front line to do their jobs efficiently and meet deadlines and targets and
provide all the services that they need to.
Putting aside automation
Can you give us, the New Zealand public, assurances
that the cuts to the back office staff will not in any way
impair the frontline staff to continue to
provide the services, support,
and everything else that they do now?
Well, my job is to run the department with the
resources I've got, whoever the government is.
And that's what I've always done.
Mm.
And there's been some ups and downs in that.
I think, Jo, you guys are asking the wrong question.
Ray's job is to give options and to say to
the government of the day, "Here are your options.
If you choose this one,
your government will be offering services at the
following
current or reduced levels. What political
choices do you want to make?"
My view is that there are definitely areas in
this state where we do not
actually need the current level of service.
But we expect the civil service to give us the options
as to where those cuts can be made.
So to clarify then,
Ray will provide you or whoever with
options if-
After the next election.
That's what Nicola Willis has said.
That's correct.
Nicola Willis has said-
Yes, right. Okay
... on the budget, after the next election.
Yes. And so then the options that you're given as ministers or the
ministers will base
their decisions based on the options that are given, and there's
not necessarily any guarantee because Ray obviously can't do that as part of his
role. There'd be no guarantee that current service delivery would remain.
Yes. I want you to listen very carefully.
This is my expectation as a New Zealand First
politician.
We are reconfiguring the state.
Mm.
We are interested in the reconfiguration of the state
and a recalibration in the delivery, the
scale of the state's services.
Can I just...
Because we are also deregulating key sectors, therefore
certain services and the manner in which society
has seen them delivered may not be the same.
It is up to the leadership of the state sector to
professionally give options to the politicians
who want to reconfigure
the character of the state.
So you'll be taking it to the ballot boxes as to whether-
I-
... New Zealanders can expect the same delivery of service.
Meet me during the election campaign.
Okay.
You had a question?
Yes.
Yes. Right, Steve.
Thank you. It would be remiss of us, Minister, to not
discuss bottom trawling, given you raised it in your opening ambit, and you've
been generous with your willingness to range across issues.
The social license for bottom trawling-
Oh, this term.
But let's-
More cultural Marxism.
It's based
on people seeing-
I'll get it quick, Steve, because I've got a question too.
It's based on people seeing footage of coral rubble, of seeing
centuries-old benthic environments, ancient
corals smashed by fishing gear,
and the public and the people rightly are not
content to see that go on.
Mm-hmm.
What are your strategies-
Yep
... for addressing those issues other than just saying, "We're not going to do
anything about it"?
Steve, I enjoy you better when you're strumming a guitar.
It's one person at least.
The second thing is-
... in our country,
bottom trawling, by and large, has taken
place for 120 years, in many
cases,
over mud, sand,
dead shell-riddled areas, and the fish are
still there.
Mm.
And where we have had to close areas,
we've done so. This catastrophic noise
coming out from a minority
of sort of
confused voices in Auckland, forget about them.
What about the scallop fishery next?
That is a very good point. They are suffering because of
bad land use practices driven by poor local
governance, not the commercial fishing industry.
Thank you very much.
Right, do we have any more questions?
No, we don't. But you had one.
We've covered it all.
Yeah.
Dead orcas, the whole nine yards.
Thank you very much, Minister.
How about?
Thank you.